Recovery point objective or
RPO is the maximum amount of time over which you can lose data.
Customers are generating data within your platform,
and losing that data after it has been generated is
even worse than not being able to ingest it in the first place,
which is what downtime would be.
Thus, we separately track the duration of
time over which we are allowed to lose customer data.
It may sound odd but it's almost always true that losing
customer data is worse than not being able to take it in in the first place.
As a customer, would you rather
an online shopping platform not be available for you to place an order,
or that they take your order but then lose it.
Don't forget to consider that losing it also
likely means that they don't know that you ever submitted the order,
and thus, they can't come back to you and ask you for your order again,
your order will simply never show up.
Most data is lost in one of two ways.
If your system is up and available to your users but
some failure is preventing it from durably storing the information sent to it,
perhaps your database is a 100 percent full,
then you are losing data.
Systems tend to only have one shot at capturing data,
and if they miss it, the data is gone.
It may be possible to determine what data is missed
by examining logs or other ancillary data sources,
but this can be tricky,
time-consuming, and possibly not 100 percent accurate.
The second way is if you find yourself needing to restore from
backup data and your backup is some amount of time old, you will lose data.
If you back up your database once an hour,
then your RPO must be at least one hour.
If your backup completes at one o'clock and you
have massive data corruption occur at 1:45,
then to use the one o'clock data means that you will lose 45 minutes worth of data,
and the RPO for that incident would be 45 minutes.
Having redundant systems is the key to avoiding recovery in the first place.
Highly available services keep things running and reduce service disruptions.
You can use features like
S3's version buckets in order to keep older versions of objects.
In the case of data corruption,
you can simply undo it and revert to a previous iteration of your data.
Services like RDS and DynamoDB offer point-in-time data recovery.
This means that they essentially have a continual backup.
If you were to experience massive data corruption at 1:45,
you can restore your data to 1:44 and have very little data loss and a very small RPO.
Do not overlook the fact that if data corruption occurs
at 1:45 and you don't realize it until 2:15,
you will still suffer 30 minutes of data loss.
This is why it is imperative to have strong monitoring and alerting.